In this section, we will look at how Linux identifies and manages hardware devices attached to the system.
Then, we will see ways to list and get detailed information about these devices from the command line.
To understand this, let's take an example of a USB disk to be used in the system.
As soon as the device is attached to the system, a corresponding device driver,
which is part of the kernel space, detects the stage change, and generates an event.
This event, which is called uevent is then sent to the user-space device manager daemon called udev.
The udev service is then responsible for dynamically creating a device node
associated with the newly attached drive in the /dev file system.
Once this process is complete, the newly attached disk should be visible under /dev file system.
Now let's check out a few ways to list and get detailed information about the hardware components attached to the Linux system.
Dmesg is a tool used to display messages from an area of the kernel called the ring buffer.
When a Linux operating system boots up, there are numerous messages generated by the kernel that appear on the display screen.
These messages also contain logs from the hardware devices that the kernel detects
and provide a good indication of whether it is able to configure them.
You can redirect the output of dmesg using less or search for specific keywords using grep.
The udevadm utility is a management tool for udev.
The udevadm info command queries the udev database for device information.
In the example, we are querying the hard disk attached to the system.
The udevadm monitor command listens to the kernel uevents.
Upon detecting an event, it prints the details,
such as the device path and device name on the screen.
This command is quite handy to determine the details of a newly attached or removed device.
In the example here, we have removed the USB mouse from the system.
The lspci command stands for list PCI.
This command is used to display information about all PCI devices that are configured in the system.
Examples of PCI devices are ethernet cards, raid controllers, video cards,
and wireless adapters that directly attach to PCI slots in the motherboard of the computer.
PCI is an abbreviation for peripheral component interconnect.
The lsblk command lists information about block devices.
Here sda is the physical disk.
The sda1 to sda5 are partitions created for this disk.
We will learn more about disks and partitions in the storage section.
For now, please remember that the type disk refers to the whole physical disk,
and the type partition refers to a reusable disk space carved out of the physical disk.
In the command output, you can also see that there are major and minor numbers associated with each device.
The major number which is on the left-hand side of the colon
identifies the type of device driver associated with the device.
In this case, the number 8 refers to a block sdisk device.
The minor number is used to differentiate amongst devices that are similar and share the same major number.
Here the numbers 0 to 5, help identify the different partitions for the disk sda.
The table here shows some of the commonly used devices along with their major numbers.
For a comprehensive list, check out the reference article.
To display information about the CPU architecture, use the lscpu command.
This command provides detailed information such as the CPU architectures,
the number of cores, threads, model, et cetera.
To understand this output better, let us quickly go through the two popular CPU architecture types
32-bit and 64-bit processors
32-bit processors were predominantly used until the 1990s.
In simple terms, a 32-bit CPU can address and store 2 to the power of 32 values in its registers.
A register is a location on the CPU that can be rapidly accessed.
It is generally used to load data from memory and carry out arithmetic operations.
In comparison, the 64-bit CPU can address and store 2 to the power of 64 values.
The 32-bit CPU also has a limitation on maximum memory of 4 gigabytes,
whereas for a 64-bit CPU, the theoretical limit is 18 exabytes.
This number is often limited by the operating system used.
With these differences in architecture also comes the limitation of software running on them.
For example, a machine with a 32-bit CPU architecture can only run a 32-bit OS.
You cannot install a 64-bit OS in a 32-bit CPU machine,
but the other way around is still possible, although not recommended.
The same is applicable for software running on these machines.
A 32-bits CPU machine can only install a 32-bit version of a software,
a 64-bit CPU can run both 32-bit and 64-bit software.
Still, it is generally recommended to run the 64-bit version if such an option is available.
Now, going back to the lscpu command and briefly inspect the output,
the first thing to notice is that the CPU architecture is 64-bit.
Sockets are the physical slots on the motherboard where you can insert a physical CPU.
In this case, it is 1.
Each physical CPU can have multiple cores, and in this case, the number of cores is 4
and each core can run multiple threads at the same time, in this case, 2.
The total number of CPU or virtual CPUs rather available on the system
is the number of sockets multiplied by the number of cores and threads, which is 8 in this case.
This system can run 8 parallel threads at a time,
and this value is seen under the CPU's field in the command output.
Moving along, the command also prints other useful information, such as the vendor and model of the CPU.
The lsmem command can be used to list the available memory in the system.
Use this command with the dash dash summary flag to print the summary.
In this case, this machine has 8 gigabytes of online memory.
To get a more comprehensive output, run the lsmem command without the dash summary flag.
Another command to see information about the memory is the free command.
This command shows the total versus used memory in the system.
Use the dash m flag to display the result in MB,
the dash k in KB, and dash g in GB.
The lshw is a tool to extract detailed information on the entire hardware configuration of the machine.
It can report exact memory configuration, firmware version, mainboard configuration,
CPU version and speed, cache configuration, bus speed, et cetera.
Bob tries to run the command lshw and gets a warning message that says
the output is incomplete or inaccurate and to run it as the superuser.
He shows that to Dave, Dave replies, "Yes.
The more you work on the system, you will find that there are many commands
that require root user privileges to work correctly."
We will cover privilege escalation in detail some other day, but for now,
let me show you how you can run commands with root privileges.
Dave explains that not every user can run all the commands in the Linux system.
Some commands need to be run as the root or the superuser.
Fortunately, there is an easy way to do this with the command called sudo.
Try running the same command as before, but this time, add the command sudo before the lshw command.
Bob tries it, finds that it is asking for his password.
Dave continues, "With sudo, users are prompted to enter their own password."
Bob enters the password and this time the result of lshw command is printed without any warning.
Dave carries on, "With sudo, you can control which user gets to run commands as the superuser.
You can also define which commands they can run, and also replay back commands a user has run with root privileges."
We will cover sudo in much more detail in a later session.